JUDY WOODRUFF: But, first, let's
turn to the Senate Republican
bill to overhaul parts of
Obamacare.
The Senate may be in recess
this week, but Majority Leader
Mitch McConnell is working
behind the scenes to craft a
bill that will appeal to enough
Republican votes to pass.
One of the key stumbling blocks,
the provision to cut Medicaid
spending by more than $770
billion over 10 years.
That has sparked serious
concern among many governors,
among other reasons, over what
it could mean for opioid
abuse treatment and
related health needs.
The Medicaid expansion under
the Affordable Care Act
provided new coverage to many.
Reportedly, Senator McConnell
has been considering
a $45 billion fund to
deal with opioid abuse.
New Hampshire is one state
that is dealing with a crisis.
It has the second highest
rate of opioid deaths
relative to its population.
I spoke with the state's
Republican governor, Christopher
Sununu, a short time ago, and
started by asking him why he
doesn't support the current
Republican Senate proposal.
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU (R), New Hampshire:
Well, I think it's important
to start off by understanding
that Obamacare has failed,
it is not sustainable,
it is not affordable.
Specifically here in New
Hampshire, the health care
exchange is really on the brink.
We're looking at upwards
of 40 percent cost
increases to individuals.
That's just not
affordable to anyone.
So, I do applaud the Senate
and the House's efforts and the
Trump administration's efforts
to really take Obamacare as
a reform that has to happen.
That being said, what they're
really doing here is, they're
kind of conflating two issues.
They're looking at Medicaid,
traditional Medicaid entitlement
reform, which absolutely has to
be a viable discussion in
Congress, and Obamacare reform.
And they're really
putting the two together.
That's the end result there.
The cost implications, if you
will, are really drastic to
the state of New Hampshire.
You're looking at over
$1.5 billion at best
over the next 10 years.
That's not just a challenge
for us in the state.
It's not practical.
It's just not practical at all.
We have no sales tax,
we have no income tax.
We don't have the taxes to
raise, nor would we ever want
to, like other states do.
So we have to find a
better solution there.
So I commend them for
taking up the challenge.
But right now, as it sits, the
Senate plan is not a viable
solution for this state.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Governor,
specifically with regard to
the opioid use crisis in your
state of New Hampshire,
what would this bill, this
proposal mean for that?
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU: Well, we have been
on kind of ground zero, if you
will, for the opioid crisis.
We have one of the fastest
growing economies, one of
the best qualities of life.
Because we are a small state,
that allows us to be very
innovative in our approach.
And so we have been able to
sustain great success in the
state, in spite of the opioid
crisis.
But part of that, when you
look whether it's Medicaid
expansion or other programs that
have allowed individuals to
get care, recovery services,
medical care that they otherwise
may not have -- would have been
able to receive, that has been
a big boon for our state and
it's been a big boost to those
individuals and allowed those
doors to be opened to them
in ways that otherwise
it wouldn't have.
So, when you look at both
the cost implications,
how Medicaid expansion
right now as it's proposed
to being winnowed down, if
you will, over the next few
years, again, those costs are
real severe and they're again
something that just is not
practical for the state of New
Hampshire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What would
it mean to the program
that you have in place
now in New Hampshire?
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU: Well, when you
look at folks that are coming
through recovery or treatment
or folks that are looking
to fight that addiction,
you have remember
addiction with opioids is
not something that you get
through in a couple of years.
It's a lifelong struggle.
It's a lifelong kind of battle,
if you will, that folks have
to have the programs in place
not just for six months or a
year, but for the long-term.
And we have to have
those recovery programs.
We have to have those
treatment options in place.
With opioid addiction
comes some very severe
medical conditions as
well, whether liver
or heart issues
that come with that.
Right now, we're
able to treat those.
We're able to be preventative
with a lot of those, as opposed
to just allowing the old
way of doing things where
everyone would just pile
into the emergency room.
So, going back, taking instead
of one or two steps back,
but three or four steps back,
all the way to the point where
we're cutting services that,
pre-Obamacare, were in place,
right, we're looking for a
system that, for New Hampshire
at least, is worse than there
were even pre-Obamacare.
So my message to the
Senate is very clear.
Look at Obamacare reform as is.
Look at that program, what
we can do to reform it.
Understand that the opioid
crisis is affecting a lot of
states, not just New Hampshire.
Understand what those
implications might be.
It's not just in the funding,
but it's in the flexibilities
that states have to have.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU: You have to
have a flexible system.
And being able to do that
will allow us as governors to
implement the programs that much
easier.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, it's
been reported, as I think you
know, that the Senate majority
leader, Mitch McConnell,
is looking at possibly
adding something like
$45 billion to deal
with opioid abuse around the
country over a period of years.
Would that make a difference?
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU: When you look
at $45 billion to deal with
the opioid crisis, absolutely
that's going to
make a difference.
There's no doubt about it.
If it's money going in to kind
of hopefully get votes in the
Senate bill, that's a different
issue.
I'm not going to sign onto that.
But there is no doubt
that more resources
would help this crisis.
It allows recovery centers to
have more longer-term programs,
open up treatment options.
We can break down some
of the permitting process
to get more of those beds
open for individuals,
peer-to-peer recovery services.
We have been able to be very,
very innovative here in New
Hampshire, really on the cutting
edge.
And that's how we have been
able to sustain such a growing
economy, such a high quality
of life, in spite of the crisis.
We don't want to start throwing
a wrench in those gears right
now and slow down the incredible
process we have been able
to make in New Hampshire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I ask you about
that money because specifically
other governors, I know
John Kasich of Ohio and others
who have an opioid crisis in
their own states, have said
that's just not enough money
to make a difference over
a long number of years.
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU: Well, as I said
earlier, you know, this is
something that is not going
to get solved in the
next couple of years.
It is going to be a lifetime
issue for a lot of these folks.
We have to have lifetime-style
programs in place to kind
of ease them not just off of
the opioids they're in,
making sure they have
peer-to-peer support
recovery programs, making
sure they can enter the
work force and hopefully
get on better private
insurance plans, as
opposed to just relying
on expanded Medicaid or
the health care exchange.
So, when you're able to create
systems that work efficiently
-- I'm an engineer by trade.
I'm all about creating
an efficient system.
When you're able to do that
and implement that, there is
a lot of savings you can have
on the back end.
I do believe dollars can help.
There's no doubt about that.
But when you look at the total
implication of this Senate
bill, $1.5 billion at best
over the next 10 years, I don't
mean to sound glib, but $45
billion here and there really
isn't making the dent and really
making the long-term effects
that we have to be addressing
as part of a long-term
Medicaid reform.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor, one
other thing, the argument that
the Republicans in Congress
have made on Medicaid and
that is -- and the president's
budget director, Mick Mulvaney,
has said Medicaid is
unsustainable on the path that
it's on now, it's grown way too
expensive, it cannot continue
like this, cuts have to come,
there has to be a change in
the trajectory.
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU: Well,
look, I would absolutely
agree with that.
Look, Washington is dealing
-- the Senate and the House
and the president are dealing
with nearly $20
trillion in debt.
That is real money
owed to someone, and
a lot of it oversees.
So, our spending over the
last eight years has gone
completely out of control.
And so they do have
the challenge ahead of
them of reeling that
spending back in, creating
more efficient systems.
Reeling it in is one thing.
Going above and beyond from
even where we were eight
years ago is another story.
And that's where we kind of
draw the line and say, look,
let's deal with Obamacare here,
let's deal with Medicaid
entitlement reform in another
discussion, another discussion
that frankly has to probably
be a longer discussion,
have to really get the
input from the states,
nothing that should be rushed.
So if we can deal with
those two issues separately,
I think we can have just
much better outcomes
and a much more viable
solution for all the states.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor Chris
Sununu of New Hampshire, thank
you very much for talking
with us.
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU: Thank you, Judy.